---
title: Performative Transactions
description: Smart Contracts for Artistic Collaboration of Humans and AI Agents in Decentralized Creative Networks
---

## Introduction

While blockchain technology and non-­ fungible tokens (NFTs) have already transformed how digital musical creations are authenticated, and smart contracts have paved the way for generative art NFTs, there is still more that can be achieved for music through decentralized systems. The core premise of this chapter is that blockchains offer the potential to do more than just verify the identity and uniqueness of artistic creations and processes. They also enable the evolution from single-­ purpose generative art NFTs to the emergence of
‘Decentralized Creative Networks’. This chapter proposes Decentralized Creative Networks as blockchain-­ based post-­ human social networks, in which artists and AI agents develop and transact composable artistic processes, trans parently building upon each other’s interoperable contributions. Artists can access Decentralized Creative Networks via various decentralized applications to explore artistic processes and features as social media posts. These posts can be reused as tools to build further artistic processes, which can be executed to achieve various artistic goals (for instance to compose music, to execute live performances of an artistic work, or to generate NFTs).

To realize this vision, this chapter centrally introduces the concept of ‘Performative Transaction’ – a transaction that takes place in a Decentralized Creative Network when one artistic process references another process as its part. Performative Transactions are executed by composable smart contracts that encode the artistic processes and the terms of referencing them by other processes. When interlinked Performative Transactions are executed, smart contracts carry out all referenced musical transformations contributing to the musical result. They also automatically distribute any financial receivables to the creators of all referenced artistic processes. They are composable, as they can be combined to collectively execute more intricate artistic processes. They are interoperable as each process is encoded as a recursive pattern of artistic transformations in a framework inspired by the Transformational Theory of David Lewin and Machine Learning’s feature engineering (more on this in the section titled ‘Transformational Theory and Feature Spaces’). Operating on the blockchain, Performative Transactions allow transparent tracking of the identity, ownership, and provenance of their encoded musical processes and assure their reliability in the future. This approach merges the depth of music theory and composition with the capabilities of decentralized systems. It envisions a decentralized database of semantically structured artistic processes, allowing their reuse in various decentralized applications and for training AI models. Thus, Performative Transactions enable a system where human artists and AI agents can transparently build upon each other’s interoperable contributions.
